Potential evapotranspiration (PET) is an important metric for assessing irrigation needs, predicting crop growth conditions, and optimizing water allocation. However, traditional formulas have limitations in PET estimation under complex climatic conditions and the spatial resolution of future climate data is low. Super-resolution models can refine meteorological data and provide new tools for accurate PET estimation and drought risk assessment. To this end, this study proposes a refined PET estimation method based on the super-resolution model and climate data for predicting the characteristics of future PET spatial and temporal variations in China at a resolution of 10 km and analyzing its influencing factors. The results show that the RCAN model performs better in both spatial and temporal dimensions than the other seven super-resolution models, with its average MAE and MSE of 0.167 and 0.071, and R² and KGE of 0.972, respectively, demonstrating excellent downscaling ability and high-precision prediction performance. In addition, the RCAN model shows stable prediction accuracy in different climatic zones and complex terrain regions, and is able to effectively capture the seasonal fluctuations and regional differences in PET. The annual and seasonal average PET in China in the future shows an overall upward trend, with small changes in the SSP126 scenario and significant growth in the SSP585 scenario. Seasonal characteristics show the fastest growth in spring and summer, and the slowest growth in winter; regional characteristics show the fastest growth in the south, and lower growth in the north and the Tibetan Plateau. Future increases in PET are mainly driven by rising temperatures and enhanced radiation, while decreasing relative humidity and changes in barometric pressure also play important roles. Under the SSP585 scenario, the significant warming effect makes the contribution of temperature-related indicators to PET particularly prominent. The framework proposed in this study can effectively achieve a refined estimation of potential evapotranspiration, which provides accurate and reliable scientific support for irrigation demand assessment, water resource management, and drought risk prediction, and helps to optimize future agricultural and ecosystem management strategies.
